Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
Spring 1940 - six months
into World War II.
Hitler's war machine
is on its way to Norway.
The primary goals are
to secure control of:
The Norwegian coast
The king
The government
and Norway's gold reserve
This is the story of the gold.
8 APRIL 1940
THE NIGHT BEFORE THE INVASION
- Oh!
- How nice!
- Are you coming?
- Yes. I'll be right there.
- Just a minute.
- Let it be. Come on.
I'm almost done.
- Hello!
- Hi!
- I'm sorry we're late.
- That's fine. Hello.
- Hi. Chris.
- Hi. Uncle Fredrik.
We're about to serve the cake.
If Fredrik can part from it.
Hello.
- How nice.
- Look who's here! It's Chris!
- It's good enough now.
- I'll just light the candles.
Hooray for you on your birthday
We want to congratulate you
We all stand around you in a ring
And look. now we will march
Bow and nod and curtsy...
We have to go down to the basement.
- Everyone.
- No. Dad! It's just a drill.
- Where's Nils?
- Nils?
- I thought you brought him.
- No. I didn't bring Nils.
Hey...
- Nils is watching the flat.
- But Dad. I've got to have Nils.
We can't go up during
the air-raid alarm to get Nils.
We can't do that.
- Is something wrong?
- Nils is upstairs.
Do you want me to take care of it?
Should I go and get Nils?
No. you don't have to do that.
Yes. I do. Nils is important.
Okay. Aunt Nini will get Nils.
It'll be fine.
Look what I found.
- And I brought this.
- Yes!
Nils!
Happy birthday
The commanding admiral reports:
Tonight. German warships
passed the Oslofjord Fortress
under fire
from the fortress's batteries
and continued onwards.
At 4:30 a.m..
heavy fire was reported
between some of the warships
and Oscarsborg.
A cruiser passed the fortress
but was later stranded at Digerud.
Other vessels have bombarded Horten.
German warships have also.
under fire from the fortress.
passed into Bergen.
which has been occupied.
Two ships have passed
into Trondheim.
The city has apparently
been occupied.
One ship has reached Narvik.
most likely after battle
with Norwegian vessels.
INVASION DAY
9 APRIL. EARLY MORNING
- How much time do we have?
- They're already here.
- What do we need?
- A miracle.
Pending a miracle.
how many lorries?
20. maybe 25.
in addition to the ones we have.
- Then you'll have to find them.
- I can't conjure up 20 lorries.
Unless you want me
to hijack vehicles.
Great idea. Get to it.
Is the mission clear?
We have to procure vehicles.
Yes. I just...
I think this goes against
my job description.
You have a new job now.
This day will be
a little out of the ordinary.
Yeah...
THE GOLD TRANSPORT
Irene. listen to me. Darling...
No! You can't mean that
we should just sit here and wait.
It will only take a few hours.
I'll be back soon.
I heard the planes. Fredrik.
I know what it means.
- So does the rest of Oslo.
- That's why I have to go down.
We possess sensitive information
that can't fall into German hands.
Veslemøy. please.
Can't someone else do it?
You don't lead that office.
You're a secretary.
I have a task to do.
and I have to go down there.
As soon as I'm back.
we'll go to Mylla.
The cabin is the safest place.
and I'll be back in a few hours.
I promise.
DRØBAK
36 KM OUTSIDE OF OSLO
- Oslo. please.
- No. we're going to Kolbotn.
You will drive me to Oslo.
It's important.
I have to get to the central bank.
It's very important.
You're wet.
The ship sank.
- Our ship was sunk.
- Were there any others on board?
THE LABOUR PARTY'S HEAD OFFICE
Burn it.
- Burn it.
- All right.
- Statistics from the year-end.
- Burn it.
This?
- All right.
This will be sent. Don't put it
outside until the transport's here.
Burn it.
Wait. wait. wait.
- Excuse me? Haslund?
- Yes.
- The finance minister's office.
- I'll call them back later.
- Burn it.
- Haslund.
It's the finance minister himself.
Okay.
Burn it. Check it. Burn it.
Hello?
- Hello?
- Oscar? Is everything all right?
Fredrik. I need a driver.
We have to evacuate.
I don't understand.
You need drivers?
Jesus Christ. We're being invaded.
I need someone I can trust.
- Like an old friend. Fredrik.
- I understand.
- I'll be there as soon as I can.
- Thanks. Thank you.
Irene?
Dear Fredrik.
Come as soon as you can
Love. your girls
The Brits have mined
the Norwegian coast.
Should Germany come to our rescue?
Brats like you who lick the arses of
the Brownshirts should be castrated!
Get lost!
What the hell?
Hey!
No. no. no! No!
I'm not a car thief.
I'm not trying to steal your lorry.
I'm from
the central bank of Norway.
If you're from the central bank.
I'm Jesus of Nazareth.
No. no. no!
I'm on an important mission.
We need transports.
Up to Lillehammer. Here.
Read this.
Scram.
I said scram!
What's the cargo?
THE CENTRAL BANK OF NORWAY
Come on!
There. I found a driver and a lorry.
- That's good. What's that?
- I don't want to talk about it.
- I beg your pardon?
- It was quite traumatic. actually.
Sit still!
- It's not him.
- Yes. it is.
I should have cancelled
my appointments.
- It seems the world is about to...
- Hey. hey. hey!
It's him.
Right.
No mobilisation orders?
I can see the Germans
outside the window!
Nanna. what's the status of the
lorries from Kristiania Transport?
All of them were rerouted
to the central bank.
Hello! Can I get
everyone's attention?
I just talked
to Police Chief Welhaven.
and the Evacuation Commission
is being disbanded.
effective immediately.
But we're the ones
with the evacuation plan.
The government has started
the evacuation without us.
But that's our entire purpose.
We have to shred everything
and leave the city.
What. and flee?
We should fight back.
Feel free to volunteer
and find a gun.
but I'm leaving...
Come on!
- Is this the last crate?
- It's the last one.
Over here.
Drive straight to Lillehammer.
No stops. no passengers.
- Get in.
- In the back?
- You'll watch the cargo.
- No. I'm a bank clerk.
You work for the bank. This will be
one of your most important tasks.
Sitting in the back
of a speeding lorry?
Do I have to explain
to one of my own employees
how the gold standard works?
This is the foundation
of our economy.
If the Germans get hold of it.
they'll have a stranglehold on us.
Get in!
- Goddamn it!
- Hey. stop it! Stop!
Not a word to anyone
about what we're transporting.
And if we run into any Germans.
we're lucky that he's armed.
Oh. damn.
Go home now.
It won't be any pleasant
at work in the days to come.
Kristiansand has suffered
from air raids.
German troops have gone ashore
in Egersund.
Tønsberg reports
that at 5:30 this morning.
a squad of German troops
went ashore at Vallø
outside of Tønsberg.
numbering around 20 soldiers.
The inhabitants have abandoned
the lighthouse
and are moving towards Tønsberg.
A shot was fired
from the Norwegian side.
but the Germans have remained calm.
No. stop! Wait.
- The gold?
- On its way to Lillehammer.
And the governor
of the central bank?
I can't reach him.
but he knows what to do.
Okay. Drive.
We have...
searched. but...
we can't find...
- Schlüssel?
- Die? Der?
- Der Schlüssel.
Mr Rygg.
It is important for you
to understand
that our great Reich comes in peace.
We love Norway.
I love you.
The key.
Here. The key.
Light.
Hey! You!
I'll freeze to death if I stay here
all the way to Lillehammer!
- There. Good.
- No. you can't.
- But there's room for more.
- We don't allow passengers.
- No passengers?
- I'm sorry.
- You're meant to take care of this!
- I'm trying!
No!
There.
I said no. No.
You can't just drive
without taking passengers!
The minister of foreign affairs said
that he this morning at five o'clock
was visited by the German envoy.
who both in writing
and verbally made it clear
that Norway should not resist
now that the Germans
have landed troops
in key locations throughout Norway.
He said that the best thing
for Norway would be
to submit
to German military administration.
Is that...?
JØRSTADMOEN MILITARY CAMP
It looks like him.
Can I get your autograph?
Of course.
Attention!
I'm here to report for duty.
THE CENTRAL BANK OF NORWAY
LILLEHAMMER BRANCH
Here we are. That was painless.
Are you just going to sit there?
Thanks for the help. everyone.
The cargo is safe here.
Thank you. Go home. but be careful.
THE GOVERNMENT'S SAFE HOUSE OTTA
Excuse me.
Do you have another telephone?
I'm afraid not.
We only have the one.
Hi. Do you want a ride?
We're heading back to Oslo.
In the back?
No thank you. Never again.
- It's time to go.
- Yes.
Where are we headed?
Bank Governor Rygg thought
that the gold reserve would be safe
in Lillehammer.
It's not.
I need someone who can...
take over the responsibility
of the gold.
We have to get it out
of the country.
Well. Oscar. a task like that
should go to someone
in the banking sector
or the military.
I'm not asking as a friend.
I'm not asking for a favour.
This is an order.
I'm giving you the mission
of leading the transport
of Norway's gold reserve.
THE CENTRAL BANK OF NORWAY
I'm sorry. I hope you understand.
Is there a plan?
We have to get it to the west coast.
Åndalsnes is still safe.
We'll get support from British
naval vessels and troops there.
You will have a company
at your disposal.
You need a military escort.
Irene and Veslemøy are
at the cabin. In Mylla.
They must leave the country.
Why?
If the Germans learn
that you're leading this.
you'll be one
of the most wanted men in Norway.
Where are the rest of the documents?
I apologise. but...
who are you?
What qualifications do you have?
Like I said. I have been charged
with securing and...
transporting the gold reserve.
Could you please open the vault.
so I can begin the registration?
Like I told you. I can't do anything
without Rygg's consent.
Try again.
Bank Governor Rygg.
This great responsibility
has been personally entrusted
to me by our Führer.
Do you know what that means?
Where is the gold?
Major. do you have a minute?
- Heil og sæl.
- Heil Hitler.
- Tell the major.
- Two men argued about a lorry.
One of them
was from the central bank.
He mentioned
a mission to Lillehammer.
Lillehammer.
Bravo. boys. Very good.
Yes. they're at a cabin
not too far away from you.
They don't have
a telephone. so if...
I understand. Yes. Thank you.
Fredrik Haslund?
Oslo is...
There are Nazi flags everywhere.
At the parliament and the palace.
I've volunteered.
So has Kristian.
He will follow the government.
I can't reach Veslemøy and Irene.
They have to leave the country
as soon as possible.
Yes. But...
It's some mission you've been given.
I don't feel that I have a choice.
I don't have a choice.
- How much gold is it?
- I don't know.
But it's all
of Norway's gold reserve.
They want me to transport
the gold to Åndalsnes
and load it onto
a British naval vessel.
- Have you talked to the Brits?
- No.
If you're leading this mission.
I want in.
It would be a little weird
to recruit one's own sister.
Why? I'm not just your sister.
I'm an asset.
I have experience from the war
in Spain. and I speak English.
I can travel ahead
and contact the Brits.
LIST NO.:
Modern warfare. gentlemen.
requires an inner life.
Building and developing yourself
puts you in a state of defence
against the catastrophe
that is threatening the world.
The Nazis will never prevail
in one-on-one combat against us
because our idea
is better than theirs.
Troop! Fall in!
Line up! Line up!
Major. troop ready.
Soldier. button up your uniform.
You may have authorisation.
but it was completely unnecessary
to come all the way to Lillehammer.
Let me remind you that
I was personally appointed
by the finance minister.
I don't work
for the finance minister.
I work for the boss
of the central bank of Norway.
He's nowhere to be found.
That's why I am here.
The Germans are coming.
I won't open the vault
for them either.
There you are.
Goddamn.
I've waited here
all night and all day.
- Oh. dear.
- Where have you been?
Good question. Here and there.
And that's between me and the Lord.
Oh. goddamn. I have to take a piss.
Why are you parked here?
Why aren't you outside the bank?
It's time to load up.
Park outside the entrance
right away.
Aye. aye. sir.
Shouldn't we...?
Sure. but I have
to take a piss first.
Excuse me?
Where can I find Fredrik Haslund?
That's me.
Major Bjørn Sunde.
Head of the military escort.
The train is ready at the station.
Why isn't anyone loading?
We're in a challenging situation
right now.
Oh? What's the problem?
Mr Lund has a dilemma.
Who is Mr Lund?
When the chain of command is broken.
you must act on your own initiative.
Everyone knows that.
Maybe in the military.
but not in the banking sector.
Mr Lund. I sympathise
with your current situation.
But right now. I think there is
legal authority to overrule.
Just get him out. Get him out.
Please.
Someone else can open it. You!
Only Mr Lund knows the combination.
Get him back. Get him back!
Mr Lund.
If you check the regulations.
I'm sure you'll find an exception.
Mr Lund.
Do you know the consequences
of insubordination in war?
Whoever refuses to obey an order
from the commanding general
in wartime
will. as is known. be shot.
You will be shot!
If I am to be shot.
it damn well won't be on the orders
of the Norwegian authorities.
Please excuse me.
Thank you for the help.
But in the future. I want to handle
things like this myself.
No. Haslund.
This is now a military operation.
So you will obey me.
I'm the ranking officer here.
Let there be no doubts about that.
Let me remind you
that this is a civilian operation
with a military escort.
So in actuality.
I am the commanding officer.
Is... everything all right?
Yes. I think I just missed a number.
I'll do it from the beginning.
Just give me a minute.
Lillehammer.
I hope there's a hotel
with a bathtub.
And wheat beer.
I can't stand Norwegian beer.
I don't get it. There must be
something wrong with the door.
Lund. Are you sure you haven't
written down the combination?
I have the instructions here.
I keep the rest in my head.
Unbelievable. The entire nation's
financial future is at stake.
and we have a bank manager
who can't open his own vault.
I'm doing my best.
Can we at least agree
that this is obstruction?
He's most likely a collaborator.
My impression is
that he's doing his best.
Are you willing to take that chance?
Do we have another solution?
DANGER
EXPLOSIVES
- Take cover!
- Come on!
Sunde. he's not coming out.
That's his own choice.
The Germans have now passed Hamar.
They'll be here before long.
Haslund! We're going to detonate!
Haslund!
The Germans will be here soon!
Hey!
I usually eat an olive when
I have to do something important
or when I'm confronted
with a challenge.
Mr Lund...
There's a major outside
who wants to blow open your door.
Soon. German soldiers will be here
who probably want to do the same.
Mr Lund?
The most important thing now
is to control your breathing.
No thank you.
I shouldn't get sticky fingers.
I understand.
- We have to tell Sunde right away.
- Of course.
Sunde!
Any government officials
and other civil servants.
and especially
any military officers.
are obligated to only obey orders
from the new national government.
Any deviation
will lead to serious...
Sheep's milk in the fingers. I see.
Get in. We'll drive to the station.
Come on!
German paratroopers
were spotted at Dombås.
Forces from Åndalsnes
and Jørstadmoen are moving in.
Thank you. Sunde.
Next.
66.
NUMBER OF LARGE CRATES
I just have to ask. Are you going
to do that with all of them?
- We need an overview.
- 402.
Next.
- How many crates are there?
- That's what we need to know.
- How much time will you spend on it?
- As long as it takes.
I just have to say that it's
an honour to serve Norway
in such a difficult period
in our nation's history.
- Was that...?
- Yes. that's him.
- Hi. Are you Nordahl Grieg?
- Yes. that's right.
I saw Our Honour and Our Glory
at the National Theatre.
I just want to say
that it really moved me.
- Are you just going to stand there?
- No. I...
Thank you. Or...
- Come on.
- Yeah.
Sunde. what should we do
about the German paratroopers?
You're lazing about. I see.
I have a task for you.
We need a vanguard to report
any sabotage or enemy activity.
Right. I have a question.
I'm from the central bank in Oslo...
You can forget Oslo.
And if the Germans stop this train.
all of us will most likely die.
Use this.
It's a flare gun.
Fire it if you see anything.
Should we drive the lorry?
This is your fault.
You know that?
I could have been home now. but no.
You had to go out
and have a good time.
I hear what you're saying. kid.
but we're here now.
so keep your mouth shut.
Use the torch.
I can't see for shit here.
We have a complete inventory.
1.503 crates of gold bullion.
39 barrels of coins.
divided among five freight wagons.
Total weight. 52 tonnes.
Sign it. please.
They're here.
- Thanks for the help.
- Good luck.
There. Everything is on board.
At last.
Bank Manager Andreas Lund.
Sit down!
Sit down.
Do you understand German?
Yes.
Where is the gold?
I don't know.
I could have been at home now.
in a warm bed. drinking hot cocoa.
- Stop your damn whining.
- I have frostbite in my fingernails.
One of my teeth is probably loose.
And it's all your fault!
Says the man
who tried to steal my ride.
We're in the same situation.
but you don't hear me whining.
I could have been
more useful somewhere else.
- Someplace warmer.
- Yeah. I see.
Let's see if Mr Bank Clerk
can warm up in some other way.
Come on.
Full speed ahead.
Are you tired already?
What's that?
It looks like a person.
- Hey! Move!
- Shush!
- Maybe we should warn them.
- No. we'll handle this.
Hey. hey. hey. He might be armed.
Only one way to find out.
Hey... Who is he?
A dead German.
- What did you say?
- A dead German.
Are you just going to sit there.
or are you going to help me?
Grenade!
Odd Henry?
Odd Henry!
Don't shoot!
Troop! Ready your weapons!
Lower your guns! We're Norwegians!
Sunde. they're Norwegians.
Right.
Can anyone tell us what's going on?
These two won't say anything.
Right... It's a secret mission.
For a secret mission.
they've made one hell of a racket.
What were those shots?
We opened fire
when your boys shouted in German.
Fortunately. no one was hit.
- Any news about the Germans?
- There's a lot of them.
We got these two. They didn't
have time to unpack their guns.
Good job. soldier.
You should get going. It's light.
and planes patrol this area.
- It's not safe.
- Right.
We had a discussion on the train.
Should we relieve ourselves
in the tunnel
or outside. in the bushes?
You're Norway's greatest poet.
Isn't it a waste
to use you as a soldier?
You know what they say.
"War is much too serious a thing
to be left to military men."
In order to write...
you need knowledge.
You need
to experience things yourself.
And you. Haslund?
You are a secretary
in the Labour Party's
parliamentary group.
Don't you wonder why you were picked
to lead such a large operation?
It's a big responsibility.
Grieg. toilet visits
should be done inside the tunnel.
The Norwegians will try
to move the gold abroad.
The gold is on a train.
Do you understand?
Is the mission too difficult?
No. the mission is not
too difficult.
but we need more planes.
- Don't you know where the train is?
- It's not about where the train is.
It's about where it's going.
And the coast of Møre
is under British control.
So if they get there before us.
they can load the gold onto ships.
Then we have to bomb the ships.
We can't sink the ships
if we want the gold.
We will soon have to refuel.
It won't get any darker than this.
Let's go.
Soldiers! Germans!
Troop! Ready your weapons! Take aim!
- How many?
- Hard to say. Major.
On my command!
A civilian's coming!
Unarmed.
Major. it's a woman.
It's my sister.
Lower your weapons.
Keep going.
Hi.
- Major Bjørn Sunde.
- Nini Gleditsch.
- Nice to meet you.
- Likewise.
So you came with the Brits?
Yes. From here on.
the coast is clear to Åndalsnes.
There's a cruiser there. Galatea.
It has room for our heavy baggage.
You hear that. lads?
It's safe from here to Åndalsnes!
Don't celebrate just yet.
We have to carry the gold
onto the ship first.
That's fine. Just one final push.
and we're going home.
If we keep this up. we can all
celebrate Constitution Day in Oslo.
Nordahl!
A bad penny always turns up.
- We're not doing this again?
- I'm afraid so.
We're only going from here to there.
We can't have this argument
every single time.
I have to deliver control lists
to the central bank
and the Ministry of Finance.
The wagons are sealed.
We know the crates are there.
They can be counted on board.
What would you do with a soldier
who was constantly insubordinate?
The crates are going
from the train to the ship.
after they've been registered.
Thank you.
- 76.
- Thank you.
923.
NUMBER OF SMALL CRATES
- 756.
- 111.
- 39.
- 791.
That's good.
All the way in.
Major Stoltmann to the Luftwaffe.
A train with cargo belonging
to the German Reich
has arrived in Åndalsnes.
Stop the transfer of the cargo!
Bomb the train!
Copy that. We're on our way.
Okay. Move along.
Prepare to retreat!
Admiral. please sign.
Fredrik!
Come on!
Get on the train! Everyone!
Everyone on the train!
Come on!
Get down!
Cover your ears!
Listen to me! Cover your ears!
Get down!
I have to get out!
Come here.
It'll be fine.
It'll be fine. Breathe.
Breathe. It'll be fine.
Get him out!
Come on! Hurry up!
Water! We need water here!
Come on!
How much blood
do you want on your hands?
For how long
should we be sitting ducks
while you enter every single number
into your forms?
Numbers! That's what you care about.
Not wounded men. but numbers!
Your meticulousness was about
to get all of us pulverised.
Do you get that?
This is war!
And we get a secretary to lead us.
You are a paper pusher.
You are nothing!
I've been in the army all my life.
I breathe war.
Fredrik.
Don't listen to him.
Are you okay?
They'd never send bombers
into these mountains.
Come on.
More water! Come on! Water!
Copy that.
We have a problem.
Fredrik.
The telegraph in Åndalsnes
has lost contact with the Brits.
They've moved. and no one
has told the central where to.
I have to go back
to Åndalsnes and find them.
No. you're not going to Åndalsnes.
We'll wait until
the bombing lets up.
Yeah.
Fredrik. you have to get a grip.
You can't show those people
that you're about to fall apart.
I...
Nini...
We could have been killed.
All of us.
And...
I don't know
how to talk to soldiers.
Hey... this is so crazy.
When I decided to adopt Chris...
and bring her to Norway.
it was to give her a better life.
So she wouldn't have to grow up
in a fascist country.
But now. the Germans have come here.
And if I am to keep
my promise to her.
I have to go out there and fight.
Fight for her.
One thing I've learned
about war is that
wars aren't won by the few
and exceptional.
but by the many
and the ordinary.
- You're not ordinary.
- No. Neither are you.
- We're not.
- We're not ordinary.
- Don't give up.
- No.
We don't give up.
- We don't give up.
- Don't give up.
I won't give up.
Look at this.
This is where they were.
Irene and Veslemøy.
I can't guarantee that
they're still there. but... Yeah.
The number is a few days old.
Your brother...
is he always so correct?
Do you doubt
that he'll pull this off?
Fredrik has always been
meticulous and conscientious.
I don't think it's a coincidence
that he was picked to lead this.
When we were kids.
we couldn't eat grapes
before he had categorised them
according to size.
colour and consistency.
It was important
that everyone got the same amount.
and that could take some time.
This one.
Good job. lads.
- Where's Nini?
- Here she comes.
JØRGEN AARØ'S FISH TRUCK
I brought some fish.
so we don't all get goitre.
- How did it go?
- Two things.
We made contact with the Brits.
They're going to call.
so someone has to man the phone.
The other thing...
I have a new mission.
The government is leaving
the country and needs money.
I'll meet them in Molde
with the paper currency.
A fish truck
shouldn't raise any alarms.
There are eight crates
full of banknotes there.
Be careful.
You too.
You know Nini from before?
The Spanish Civil War.
We saw all kinds of things.
Right...
I'll show the Easterners
how to prepare cod.
I don't remember what happened.
No wonder. tough guy.
It got intense for you
in that passenger carriage.
But while I was about to perish
in the flames with that poet.
you ended up in the bosom
of a lovely lady
who's more of a man
than you'll ever be.
I can thank Hitler that the dentist
didn't get to pull that tooth.
It's much better to sit here
with a toothache
and eat cod with you youngsters.
It's great. That's life for you.
Haslund?
My English isn't all that great.
but it's them.
The Brits.
Yes. this is Haslund.
I understand.
Yes.
Thank you.
They're pulling out.
- Who's pulling out?
- The Brits. I think.
The last vessel. HMS Glasgow.
is on its way to Molde to evacuate
the government and the king.
The ship has room for all the gold.
The question is
when the king will come.
Troop! Fall in!
The work on the train will cease.
These tracks
won't take us where we're going.
Our goal now is vehicles.
We will use anything
that can transport the gold.
We have to hurry to Molde.
Come on!
Major Stoltmann.
we are waiting for results.
Are you having trouble
locating the gold transport?
No. don't worry about that.
You have my word.
We'll have the gold soon.
Over and out.
- Heil Hitler.
Drive faster!
Mark large crates here.
small crates here. and the number
of every single crate.
The crates will be moved straight
from the train to the lorries!
Yes. Major.
We don't have time to register them!
Everyone... please listen to me.
The glue that holds
this operation together is order.
We have to register
every single crate.
We can't control
when the Germans will be here.
We can only control our own actions.
Thank you for your cooperation.
They're going straight
to the lorries!
Gentlemen. don't lose heart.
Remember that this is
a tremendous and rare honour.
How many times in life
do you get the chance to be right
in the centre of the action.
and to as an individual be able
to directly impact
the future of our nation?
Walk with your heads held high
where history is being written.
Lovely words. Grieg.
Thank you.
Next. Go ahead.
Next.
- 189.
- Thank you. Next.
Yes. Next.
- It's 398.
- Thank you.
43.
Come on. Next.
Come on!
Drive!
Drive on. Drive!
Sunde. the next wagon.
Next lorry. Move along.
Next.
- Next lorry!
- Thank you.
Thank you.
I received a phone call.
That's the last crate.
Thank you.
Haslund.
- Everything is ready.
- The Germans are closing in.
The roads are poor. We need a ferry.
We have to get going.
Everyone to the vehicles!
We're leaving now!
I dare say the silence
will soon be broken.
I have a bad feeling about this.
The Brits are pulling out.
We're left to fend for ourselves
with the Germans on our heels.
There's probably no ship in Molde.
If you don't have anything positive
to say. it's better if you shut up.
- Maybe they didn't see us.
- That wasn't positive enough.
Is it a convoy of lorries? Over.
No. just one lorry.
Should we abort the mission?
No. keep going. We're looking
for more than one vehicle.
They can't have got far.
Report back. Out.
Come on!
Ready!
Damn it!
There has to be a tractor
on that farm.
Find sticks. Find sticks!
One. two. three!
Get it out!
I thought you said a tractor.
The horse is nature's own tractor.
But much prettier.
One. two. three. now!
The ferry is on its way.
The convoy is on the other side.
- How many vehicles are left?
- We're only missing one lorry.
It'll be here soon.
There's the problem.
The belt has snapped.
Right.
What the hell do we do now?
There must be some tools here.
You think you'll find a fan belt
in the glove compartment?
Moron.
Keep going! Go!
The last lorry probably broke down.
We can't wait any longer.
Do you hear me?
We have to get across!
Listen. everyone.
We have to move this bus
off the ferry.
It blocks the way for the lorry
that we have to get on board.
- Move all the crates out of the bus!
- Carrying duty. lads.
Hold this while I tighten it.
Yes. it's hot. It's smoking.
The engine is hot.
Come on. lads.
Get in. We'll try to start it.
Give it fuel. Come on.
- Are you stepping on it?
- Yes.
Yes. yes. yes!
Great. Ingvar!
Amazing!
Okay. Hey. hey. hey.
We have to get going.
Hey. we have to get going.
Hey... You're on that side.
One positive thing is that we
haven't seen the plane in a while.
Please don't say anything.
Every time you open your mouth.
something happens.
Haslund! They're here!
We have to go!
- Put out!
- We'll wait for the last lorry.
Put out. I said! Do you see these?
That's an order! Put out!
This isn't about the gold.
It's about our men.
We must sacrifice a few
to save the rest!
Put out!
Haslund. get back!
Go back! Go back!
Troop. ready your weapons! Take aim!
On my command! Fire!
Take cover!
So it's a plane that will reunite me
with my maker.
I'll be damned.
Goddamn it! Out!
That's the end of the road.
That's it. then.
Give up?
Never. Lieutenant.
We know they're heading for Molde.
If necessary. the Luftwaffe will
raze the entire city to the ground.
We must do everything
in our power to prevent
the Norwegians from reaching
the British ships.
Get me a plane.
I need to get up there.
I want to see for myself
how this pans out.
- We have to reseal the crates.
- Good.
This is not the work
of friendly hands.
We have to get to the pier.
Okay. come on!
Fredrik!
- Nini!
- You have to hurry.
The ship is only waiting
for the king and the government.
- The king is on his way.
- Same procedure as last time.
Crates. please.
Hey! Hurry up!
I don't know what to do.
The paper currency is locked
inside the bank vault.
- Molde Savings Bank?
- Yes.
But we can't open the door.
We have to get it out!
One thing at a time.
We have to get the gold on board
before the king arrives.
- Hurry this up.
- Get all the crates on board. now!
Next.
Here.
Hurry up!
Thank you.
Next.
Move along!
Come on!
I heard you were here. Good job.
Oh. damn. The king is here.
- Torp. we need more time.
- There's nothing I can do.
What about the gold? It's 18 tonnes.
You have to keep transporting it.
Good luck.
Where's Nini?
Sunde. find a boat.
You'll handle the registration.
You!
Come on!
Come on! Don't give up!
Try to kick open the door! Come on!
Nini!
What?
You won't fail your responsibility.
and I won't fail mine.
I'm not leaving here
without the paper currency.
Do you get that?
No!
- We can do this!
- Come on!
Thank you.
Move along!
Nowhere is safe.
so just finish the job!
- We can do this!
- We're going home soon.
Come on.
We won't give up.
We're not giving up.
No. never.
Come on!
Thank you.
Put the crate in front.
In the back.
Come on!
Again!
Reload!
Down in the harbour!
Bombs away! Wipe them out!
Take cover!
Ingvar! Get away!
We can't stay here.
We have to get up.
Stay in cover!
They're coming around!
Come on. now. Come on.
Come on!
Ingvar.
Leave me.
- Ingvar!
- Grieg! Get back!
What the hell's happened to you?
Did you get brave?
I think you'll have to manage
the rest of this journey alone.
Don't be so negative. please.
Come on.
Come on!
We have to move that lorry.
Hurry. Move that lorry.
Come on!
- That's the last one! Hurry up!
- Hurry up!
GASOLINE
We've done all we can here.
We have to move on.
Let's get the gold
back onto the lorries.
Hello.
We come from Oslo.
They don't know who we are.
They think we're Germans.
I'm Fredrik Haslund. We're here
on behalf of the government.
The central bank of Norway.
We're transporting...
Norway's gold reserve.
We need to get it further north.
The Germans are after us.
We need help.
The lads and I...
We'll help you.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Below deck!
Lost.
We've lost.
- Fly us home!
- Home?
Yes. all the way home!
- It's safe.
- Good.
That's great.
I'll tell him right away. Thank you.
Irene and Veslemøy
are safe in Sweden.
I've written something
that I would like to read to you.
"Today the flagpole stands naked
Amongst Eidsvoll's trees and greens
But precisely in this hour
We know what freedom means
Over the land. a song is rising
Triumphantly. its words awoke
Though whispered through closed lips
Under the strangers' yoke
A certainty in us was born then
Freedom and life are dear
As simple. as indispensable
as sucking in air
We felt. when threatened
with bondage
Our lungs were gasping for breath
As if in a sunken U-boat
We will not die such a death
Now we fight
for our right to breathe
For the dawn of the day we grasp
When Norwegians unite
in the same liberated gasp
We parted from kin in the south
From pale. exhausted men
To you. a promise is made
That we shall return again
Here we will remember the dead
Who gave their lives for our peace
The soldier in blood on the snow
The sailor who drowned in the seas
So few we are in our country
We are kin with all our slain
And the dead shall be beside us
The day we return again"
Not too shabby. Grieg.
The last 18 tonnes of gold
arrived in Tromsø on 9 May 1940.
one month after the invasion.
From there. it was transported
on the HMS Enterprise to England.
The gold reserve was then sent
to the US and Canada.
The gold became important
for the resistance
of the Norwegian government in exile
and the allied forces.
and for the rebuilding
of the country after the war.
Hundreds of people
took part in the gold transport.
many of them volunteers
recruited along the way.
Their efforts became an inspiration
for the resistance that followed.
Fredrik Haslund went with the gold
all the way to America.
where he remained
for the duration of the war.
leading welfare work
for Norwegian sailors.
He was finally reunited
with Irene and Veslemøy in New York.
four months after
his "quick trip down to the office".
Fredrik died in 1961. 62 years old.
Nini Haslund Gleditsch went
to London.
where she worked
for the Ministry of Supply
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
for the duration of the war.
In 1991. she received
the Humanist Prize
for her lifelong work for peace.
solidarity and equality.
Nini died in 1996. 88 years old.
Nordahl Grieg went
with the gold to London.
He was given the rank of captain
and continued the fight
for Norway's freedom
as a war correspondent for Norwegian
radio broadcasts from the BBC.
The famous poem he wrote
during the gold transport
was given the title "17 May 1940".
In December 1943. he took part
in a bombing raid over Berlin.
The plane was shot down.
and the entire crew was killed.
Nordahl was 41 years old.
In his official report
to the finance minister.
Fredrik Haslund requested
that everyone who took part
in the gold transport
should receive an embossed gold coin
from the central bank.
His wish was never granted.
Subtitles: Aleksander Kerr plint.com